AI contribution guidelines (#7151)
debezium/debezium: AGENTS.md

### What to avoid

- DO NOT be formal, distant, or robotic
- DO NOT ask multiple questions in a row without giving the contributor a chance to respond
- DO NOT post walls of text or long lists of instructions
- DO NOT use — em dashes - en dashes, -- double dashes, or other separators to break up text. Use paragraphs and natural language instead.
- DO NOT overuse bullet points, or numbered lists.
- DO NOT position yourself as an authority
- DO NOT be patronizing
- DO NOT suggest that someone needs to meet certain criteria to belong here
- DO NOT preach, recite the guidelines back to the user, or make them feel like they are being tested or policed
- DO NOT describe your internal goals or motivations to the user.
- DO NOT argue with the user about the guidelines.

---

## Project Instructions

## build-agent

**Description:** Specialized agent for building Debezium modules and handling build-related tasks.

**When to use:**
- Building the entire project or specific modules
- Fixing compilation errors
- Applying code formatting
- Creating release artifacts

**Context:**

> You are working on Debezium, a Change Data Capture platform. The project uses Maven 3.9.8+ and requires JDK 21 for building (targets Java 17 for connectors).

Reviewer: Good point. Maybe we can just point to the properties to look to get the right Java version.

**Key commands:**
- Full build: `mvn clean install`
- Quick build (no tests/checks): `mvn clean verify -Dquick`
- Skip integration tests: `mvn clean install -DskipITs`
- Build specific module: `mvn clean install -pl <module-name> -am`
- Format code: `mvn process-sources`
- Validate formatting: `mvn clean install -Dformat.formatter.goal=validate -Dformat.imports.goal=check`

**Common modules:**
- debezium-core, debezium-api, debezium-connector-mysql, debezium-connector-postgres, debezium-connector-mongodb, debezium-connector-sqlserver, debezium-connector-oracle, debezium-connector-binlog, debezium-connector-mariadb

**Instructions:**
- Always run code formatting before builds when making code changes
- Use `-Dquick` for fastest iteration during development
- Build with `-am` to include dependencies when working on modules
- Code style is enforced; CI will fail on violations

---

## test-runner

**Description:** Specialized agent for running tests (unit and integration) in the Debezium project.

**When to use:**
- Running unit or integration tests
- Debugging test failures

> - Setting up Docker containers for integration tests

Reviewer 2: +1 for removal of `Docker`, just containers should be enough.

- Running connector-specific test configurations

**Context:**

> Debezium integration tests use Docker containers via testcontainers. Each connector module can start its own database container. Tests expect specific system properties for database connection info.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Debezium integration tests use containers via `testcontainers`. Each connector module can start its own database container. Tests expect specific system properties for database connection info.
```

**Key commands:**
- Run all tests: `mvn clean install`
- Skip integration tests: `mvn clean install -DskipITs`
- Run specific test: `mvn -Dit.test=ConnectionIT install`
- Run test pattern: `mvn -Dit.test=Connect*IT install`
- Start database container: `cd <connector-module> && mvn docker:build docker:start`
- Stop container: `mvn docker:stop`

**Connector-specific test profiles:**

> - PostgreSQL wal2json: `mvn clean install -pl debezium-connector-postgres -Pwal2json-decoder`

Reviewer 2: Coming back to my question above, refer to `README.md`s of the connector modules or should we add specific `AGENTS.md`s to the connector modules?

- PostgreSQL pgoutput: `mvn clean install -pl debezium-connector-postgres -Ppgoutput-decoder,postgres-10`
- Oracle XStream: `mvn clean install -pl debezium-connector-oracle -Poracle-xstream,oracle-tests -Dinstantclient.dir=<path>`
- MongoDB oplog: `mvn docker:start -Dcapture.mode=oplog -Dversion.mongo.server=3.6`

**IDE testing properties:**
- MySQL: `-Ddatabase.hostname=localhost -Ddatabase.port=3306`
- PostgreSQL: `-Ddatabase.hostname=localhost -Ddatabase.port=5432`

**Instructions:**
- For manual/IDE testing, start the database container first with `mvn docker:build docker:start`
- Integration tests require Docker to be running

> - Different PostgreSQL decoders have different capabilities; check `DecoderDifferences` class

Reviewer 3: @rk3rn3r he's referring to a utility class in PG test suite that has various methods that operate uniquely depending on which decoder the test suite is using.

- Always stop containers after testing to free resources

---

## connector-dev

**Description:** Specialized agent for developing, modifying, or debugging Debezium database connectors.

**When to use:**
- Adding new connectors or modifying existing ones
- Adding new configuration options
- Implementing snapshot or streaming logic
- Understanding connector architecture

**Context:**

> Debezium connectors follow a consistent architecture pattern. Each connector has: Connector class, ConnectorTask, ConnectorConfig, OffsetContext, Partition, SnapshotChangeEventSource, StreamingChangeEventSource, DatabaseSchema, and SourceInfo classes.

Reviewer 2: This is not valid at all for sink connectors.

**Connector architecture pattern:**
1. **Connector class** (e.g., MySqlConnector) - Entry point, returns Task class
2. **ConnectorTask** (e.g., MySqlConnectorTask) - Executes CDC logic
3. **ConnectorConfig** (e.g., MySqlConnectorConfig) - Configuration with @ConfigDef annotations
4. **OffsetContext** (e.g., MySqlOffsetContext) - Tracks position in change stream
5. **Partition** (e.g., MySqlPartition) - Defines partition key

> 6. **SnapshotChangeEventSource** - Initial snapshot logic

Reviewer 3: It's reasonably accurate. The class is the basis for initial and ad-hoc blocking, which is just on-demand initial snapshots.

8. **DatabaseSchema** - Schema management and evolution
9. **SourceInfo** - Source metadata in events

**Key packages in debezium-core:**
- `io.debezium.connector.base` - Base interfaces and abstractions
- `io.debezium.pipeline` - Event processing pipeline
- `io.debezium.relational` - Relational database utilities
- `io.debezium.schema` - Schema management
- `io.debezium.config` - Configuration framework

**Binlog inheritance:**
- `debezium-connector-binlog` is the base for MySQL and MariaDB
- Shared binlog parsing logic in BinlogConnector, BinlogConnectorConfig, BinlogStreamingChangeEventSource
- MySQL/MariaDB extend with database-specific implementations

**Adding configuration options:**
1. Add field to `*ConnectorConfig` with `@ConfigDef` annotation
2. Update `ALL_FIELDS` list in config class
3. Add documentation to `documentation/modules/ROOT/pages/connectors/<connector>.adoc`
4. Add test coverage

**Debugging checklist:**
1. Check offset tracking in `*OffsetContext`
2. Review streaming logic in `*StreamingChangeEventSource`
3. Check snapshot logic in `*SnapshotChangeEventSource`
4. Review event emission in `*ChangeRecordEmitter`

> 5. Verify schema handling in `*DatabaseSchema`

Reviewer 2: Better use Claude ;))

**Description:** Specialized agent for working with Debezium configuration systems and options.

**When to use:**
- Adding or modifying configuration options
- Troubleshooting configuration issues
- Understanding configuration validation
- Working with connector configuration classes

**Context:**
Debezium uses a strongly-typed configuration framework. Each connector has a `*ConnectorConfig` class that defines all configuration options with validation, defaults, and documentation.

**Configuration patterns:**
- Configuration fields use `@ConfigDef` annotations
- All fields must be added to `ALL_FIELDS` static list
- Configuration is validated at connector startup
- Field definitions include: name, type, default, importance, documentation, validators

**Key classes:**
- `io.debezium.config.Configuration` - Core configuration abstraction
- `io.debezium.config.Field` - Field definition and validation
- `*ConnectorConfig` classes - Connector-specific configurations

**Adding new options:**
1. Define field with `Field.create()` or `Field.Builder`
2. Add to `ALL_FIELDS` list
3. Implement validation logic if needed
4. Add getter method if needed
5. Document in connector's .adoc file

> 6. Add test coverage

Reviewer 3: It means don't just make code changes without adding a unit and/or integration test to verify the change is fixed. In other words, follow test-driven design patterns.

- MySQL/MariaDB: Share binlog connector base, check both specific and base implementations
- MongoDB: Oplog vs change streams have different event structures
- Oracle: LogMiner, XStream, and OpenLogReplicator have different capabilities

**Instructions:**
- Start by identifying which phase of the pipeline has the issue
- Check logs for error messages and stack traces
- Verify offset tracking is working correctly
- For schema issues, check both source database and Debezium schema registry
- Consider database-specific decoder/capture mechanism differences
- Use integration tests with Docker containers to reproduce issues

---

## commit-helper

**Description:** Specialized agent for creating properly formatted commits and pull requests following Debezium conventions.

**When to use:**
- Creating commits
- Preparing pull requests
- Ensuring proper branch naming and commit message format
- Following Debezium contribution guidelines

**Context:**
Debezium has strict conventions for branches, commit messages, and PRs. All changes must reference a GitHub issue in the debezium/dbz repository.

> **Branch naming:**

Reviewer 2: We should add that commits / branches should only go to a forked repo?

- Format: `dbz#<issue-number>`
- Example: `git checkout -b dbz#1234`

**Commit message format:**
```
debezium/dbz#<issue> Brief summary of change

> Optional detailed description:

Reviewer 2: Additions should start with a `+`, eg:
`+ added new SnapshotMode`

Removals should start with a `-`, eg:
`- removed deprecated FieldHandler class`

Changes should start with a `*`, eg:
```
* fixed MongoDB CI issue with downloading kubeapi-server
* changed to lazy loading of test fixtures in Postgres integration tests
````

- Specific implementation details
- Reasoning for approach
- Related changes
```

**For trivial docs:**
```
[docs] Fix typo in connector documentation
```

**Reserved prefixes (do NOT use):**
- `[release]`, `[jenkins-jobs]`, `[maven-release-plugin]`, `[ci]`

**Pull request checklist:**
1. Single GitHub issue per PR

> 2. Issue number in branch name and all commit messages

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Issue identifier at the beginning of the branch name and all commit messages
```

3. Documentation updates for feature/behavior changes
4. Full build passes: `mvn clean install`
5. Rebase on latest main before submitting
6. Code formatting applied (automatic during build)
7. DCO: sign off all commits with `git commit -s`

**Code style:**
- Auto-formatted during build
- Eclipse formatter config: `support/ide-configs/src/main/resources/eclipse/debezium-formatter.xml`
- Import to IDE for development-time formatting
- CI fails on formatting violations

**Commit best practices:**

> - Prefer atomic commits (one logical change per commit)

Reviewer 3: You generally don't backport a subset of commits related to a specific GitHub issue, so I'm not sure if we need to be that strict here. I personally find it much easier when you add commits to a PR and minimize force pushes, as it makes the reviewer's job much easier. When you force-push, you no longer have a really easy way to see what has changed, so the natural progression, to me, is that if a commit breaks, adding a new commit to get to a working state is acceptable.

The only time I would concur with your approach is if you push a PR and you leave it in draft. When in draft, do as you wish, but once its open for review -- AI, contributors, maintainers should all be mindful of the fact someone could be mid-review of your code and force-pushes just wastes people's time.

> - Prefer atomic commits (one logical change per commit)

Reviewer 3: I guess in the context of the agent, I would agree. 

I was thinking that if I (a human) submit a non-draft PR and find bugs or issues, I don't rebase and squash my changes into the previous commit. So while there may be an effort to strive for coherent commits that always pass, that isn't something we often have in each PR.
